# Part one:

The first part of the speaking test will last for about four to
five minutes and it is generally considered to be the easiest.
The main reason for this is because many of the questions will be about you. You should already know the answers and
you can prepare for many in advance. One possible problem
with part one, however, is that the questions are too easy,
and you are tempted to respond with answers that are too
short and lacking the essential vocabulary and grammar
which will give you a high band score. We will look at how to
avoid this by first considering the difference between closed
and open questions.
Look at these two sets of three common IELTS questions:
What job do you do?
When do you usually get up in the morning?
Do you spend much time with your family?
What kinds of people are most likely to be s uccessful in
their work?
Do you think it is possible to learn time management
skills?
How do you think the family will change in the future?
The first three are typical questions from part one of the
exam and are examples of closed questions. These are
questions that can be answered with a single word or a short
sentence. So possible responses to the first three questions
are these: I’m a waiter
At seven
Yes
The second three are open questions and are from part
three. You can’t respond with one word or sentence, instead,
you have to provide a much longer answer. You are being
asked about your opinions and feelings and you will need to
think and reflect.
Many part one questions are of the closed type and you
could potentially respond quickly with one or two words.
However, you must resist the temptation to do this. The key
is to provide the information requested and then qualify it.
By qualify, I mean that you add an extra fact or two which
makes the statement less absolute.
You will also need to use a wide vocabulary resource,
idiomatic language and a range of grammatical structures.
It’s unlikely, but not impossible, that you are going to have
the opportunity to such complex structures as mixed
conditionals or the tense sequences described in the
grammatical range chapter - these are more for part two and
three of the test - but you should consider what idioms,
phrasal verbs and less common vocabulary you can
incorporate.
And finally, make sure that your responses are not too long.
Two or three short sentences are enough. In the first
sentence, you should provide the information requested and
then follow this up with an additional detail or two which
qualifies this information in some way.
Here are sample responses from those first three part one
questions:
Examiner
What job d o you do?
Candidate
I’m a waiter . It’s not a long-term career though, just a
means to an end. Hopefully, by this time next year, I will
have saved up enough to do a full-time degree course.
Examiner
When do yo u usually get up in the morning?
Candidate
Usually at se ven. This is on a weekday though because I
need to be at work by nine. At the weekend I can take it
easy and lie in until mid-morning.
Examiner
Do you spe nd much time with your family?
Candidate
I would if I c ould. Unfortunately, only during the holidays
do I get the chance to visit because they live so far away.
In each of these three responses I have directly answered
the question in the first sentence but then, in my second
sentence or two, I have qualified this response. In addition,
the answers are short and succinct, and they also
incorporate some of the vocabulary and grammatical devices
which will help you achieve a high band score.
These are:
• Means to an end - an idiom meaning something that is not
important in itself but is useful in achieving an aim.
• I will have saved up - here I have used the future perfect
tense in combination with a phrasal verb. To save up means
to keep money aside so that you can use it for a special
reason in the future.
• Take it easy - this is an idiom meaning to rest, relax or be
calm.
• Lie in - this is a phrasal verb meaning to remain in bed
after the usual time that you would get up.
• I would if I could - a very useful and pithy conditional
phrase.
• Only during the holidays do I - a negative adverbial
construction.
Topics and questions
Let’s now look in more detail at the structure of part one and
a list of the possible topics, questions, and sample answers.
It is likely that the examiner will start part one of the test by
asking questions from one or two of the following four topics
- work, study, hometown, and home. Work and study are
usually mutually exclusive, in other words, most people do
either one or the other. There are exceptions to this of course
but the examiner will invariably ask you about one of these
two depending on which is relevant to you. He or she will
actually know in advance which is more appropriate because
you will have specified what you do on your IELTS application
form. However, he or she may still ask a question in the
following format: Do you work or study?
Here are some possible responses based on the inform and
qualify system detailed above:
I’m currently working. It’s a fairly run-of-the-mill nine-tofive
job in an insurance office. Essentially, it’s a stopgap
until I can find employment in my specialist field which is
cybersecurity.
I’m studying physics at university and I’m three quarters
through a four-year course. It’s been tough, but the end is
in sight and I’m looking forward to moving on to full-time
work.
Actually, I do both because I’m studying law at college and
working part-time in a supermarket. If I didn’t have to do
the latter, I wouldn’t but unfortunately, my course costs a
fortune.
Notes:
• Run-of-the-mill - this is an idiomatic expression which
indicates that something is ordinary and not particularly
interesting or exciting.
• Nine-to-five job - is one with predictable hours, usually an
office. It has a slightly negative connotation.
• Stopgap - this is something that serves a purpose for a
short time until something better or more suitable is found.
• The end is in sight - a useful phrase indicating that the
conclusion to something will happen soon.
• Look forward - a very common phrasal verb which you
should know and be able to use. It means that you are
pleased and excited by something that is going to happen in
the future.
• Move on - a phrasal verb meaning to start something new.
• If I didn’t have to …, I wouldn’t - this is a handy conditional
you can use to describe anything you are obliged to do but
would prefer not to.
• Costs a fortune - an idiomatic phrase meaning that
something is extremely expensive.
Instead of asking whether you work or study, the examiner
may lead directly into questions about one or the other
depending on which your application form has indicated is
more appropriate. Here are some more possible questions
with sample responses. The examiner will typically ask a
couple of questions from one of these topics.