---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# What is AWS Chime

## Amazon Chime SDK
The Amazon Chime SDK is a set of real-time communications components that you can use to quickly add messaging, audio, video, and screen sharing capabilities to their web or mobile applications.

You can use the Amazon Chime SDK to build real-time media applications that can send and receive audio and video and allow content sharing.

---

## pricing

The Amazon Chime SDK offers pay-for-use pricing with no upfront fees. 
You can choose to implement some or all of the available media modalities (audio, video, and screen share) for a single rate. 
Messaging, media pipelines, speech enhancement, and PSTN audio capabilities are also available with pay-for-use pricing.


---

## Using the Amazon Chime SDK

You use the Amazon Chime SDK to build real-time media applications that can send and receive audio and video and allow content sharing.
The Amazon Chime SDK works independently of any Amazon Chime administrator accounts, and it does not affect meetings hosted on Amazon Chime. 
Instead, the Amazon Chime SDK provides builder tools that you use to build your own meeting applications.

---

## Amazon Chime SDK concepts

### meeting
An ephemeral resource identified by a unique MeetingId. The MeetingId is placed onto a group of media services that host the active meeting.

### media service group
The group of media services that hosts an active meeting.

### media placement
A set of regionalized URLs that represents a media service group. Attendees connect to the media service group with their clients to send and receive real-time audio and video, and share their screens.

### attendee
A meeting participant that is identified by a unique AttendeeId. Attendees may freely join and leave meetings using a client application built with an Amazon Chime SDK client library.

### join token
A unique token assigned to each attendee. Attendees use the join token to authenticate with the media service group.